Rozwój naszej cywilizacji podyktowany był wielkimi zmianami jakie zachodziły na drodze ewolucji technicznej. Nie bez powodu zaryzykować można stwierdzenie, że od epoki koczowniczych ludów do czasów obecnych staliśmy się nowym gatunkiem człowieka. Tym, co obecnie dyktuje tempo zmian jest rynek pracy. Z jednej strony podlega on wpływom wielu czynników ale też sam nieustannie, jak wspomniano, jest bodźcem do dalszej ewolucji naszego świata. Jedną z branż rynku, do tego najbardziej rozwijającą się na świecie, jest szeroko pojęte IT. Spośród wielu czynników kształtujących ten rozwój, w tym omówieniu wymienimy 3 z nich: klimat, epidemie i choroby cywilizacyjne oraz sytuację polityczną. Czynniki te, choć pozornie odległe, są ze sobą ściśle zazębione.
Zmiany globalnego klimatu są oczywiste i zauważalne od wielu lat. Trudno jest ich nie zauważać, jeszcze trudniej przejść wokół nich z obojętnością. Dwa ścierające się nurty, dotyczące udziału człowieka w tych zmianach pozostaną poza polem tego opracowania, ale skutki, niezależnie od ich źródła są dziś odczuwalne dla wielu z nas. Technologie stosowane dotychczas okazują się często brudne i mało wydajne, materiały i związane z nimi odpady trudne do wyeliminowania lub utylizacji. Produkcja i nadprodukcja wielu zasobów i związane z tym powolne wyczerpywanie bogactw naturalnych niejako zmuszają do poszukiwania nowych dróg rozwoju.
Dotychczasowy rozwój, mimo pewnych słabości i braków, podniósł jakość naszego życia do poziomu nieporównywalnego w żaden sposób do warunków w jakich egzystowali nasi przodkowie. Przesuwając granicę przeżycia coraz dalej jednocześnie naraziliśmy się na wpływy, które istotnie kształtują całe nasze życie. Taką wątpliwą zdobycz stanowią choroby cywilizacyjne i wybuchające co jakiś czas epidemie. Towarzyszący nam obecnie koronawirus diametralnie zmienił oblicze naszego dotychczasowego życia, przeobraził przestrzeń, ograniczył możliwości pracy i rozwoju. Zmianom poddawane są nasze przyzwyczajenia i prawo. W krótkim okresie czasu trend ten ogarnął wszystkie rejony świata i obszary gospodarki.
Tak szybkie, globalne zmiany pociągnęły za sobą przekształcenia we współczesnej polityce na poziomie zbliżonym do konfliktu zbrojnego. Zamknięte granice, wprowadzone obszary kwarantanny czy redukcja potencjału gospodarczego to widoczne dziś objawy wpływu wirusa na naszą działalność i nasze życie.
Obecna sytuacja może być zarówno hamulcem jak i motorem nowych rozwiązań technologicznych. Wymienione czynniki nakierowują na nowe nieznane dotąd ścieżki rozwoju. Staniemy się przez to świadkami nowej rewolucji technicznej, tak w całości jak i w obszarze IT. Coraz częściej mówi się o cyfryzacji pewnych obszarów naszego życia. Ostatnie miesiące wskazują, że jest to, by zapewnić normalne funkcjonowanie, niemal niezbędne. W tej chwili szczególnie uwidacznia się potrzeba zdalnego zarządzania i kontrolowania sytuacji, co doskonale pokazuje obecna sytuacja w służbie zdrowia.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Rynek pracy się ciągle zmienia sytuacja na świecie ma na niego wpływ. Jedną z najbardziej rozwijających się branż na świecie jest IT. Wobec czego największe zmiany będą widoczne właśnie w tym obszarze. Można wymienić 3 czynniki wpływające na kierunek rozwoju rynku pracy w najbliższym czasie.
- Klimat
- Epidemie, choroby cywilizacyjne (korono-virus)
- Sytuacja polityczna
Zmiany klimatyczne są pewne i nie da się przejść wokół nich obojętnie. Co do ich przyczyny można mieć różne zdanie, ale skutki są odczuwalne przez wszystkich. Ilość produkowanego plastiku czy ilość wycinanych drzew się nie zmniejsza. Świat nie jest również w stanie zutylizować produkowanej ilości odpadów syntetycznych. Dodatkowo kończące się pokłady złóż energii, nakierowują rozwój na poszukiwanie nowych. 
Sytuacja polityczna i gospodarcza kraju niewątpliwie wpływa na rozwój informatyczny w kraju. Toczące się wojny czy zapaść gospodarcza może być zarówno hamulcem jak i motorem nowych rozwiązań technologicznych. Te czynnik spowoduje na pewno rozwój IT w kierunku społecznym oraz propagandowym (wybory rządowe).
Wpływ epidemii na rozwój branży IT jest olbrzymi. Jesteśmy właśnie świadkami tych przemian. Coraz częściej mówi się o całkowitej cyfryzacji szpitali i podmiotów leczniczych. W takich sytuacjach widoczna jest potrzeba zarządzania podmiotami leczniczymi jak i kontrolowania stanów pacjenta na odległość.
Aktualnie IT w medycynie odgrywa rolę bardzo symboliczną. Programiści są wykorzystywani tylko wtedy kiedy jest potrzeba, a utrzymanie opracowanego rozwiązania spada na barki osób niebiorących udziału w tworzeniu produktu. Spowodowane jest to ogromną dziurą technologiczną w tym obszarze. Większość nakładów finansowych idzie w kierunku nowych leków. Nowe pomysły związane z IT są najczęściej start-upami, których przejście przez świat konsorcjów jest praktycznie niemożliwy. Do połowy 2020 roku można wymienić 3 firmy mające znaczy udział w IT HealthCare (GE, Siemens, Philips). 
Dodatkowo warto zauważyć, że praca z danymi medycznymi nie jest prosta. Pracując z systemem informatycznym który przetwarza dane pacjentów mamy do czynienia z danymi wrażliwymi. Wobec czego istnieje wiele ustaw wyznaczających granice.
W związku z ostatnimi problemami jakie pojawiły się na świecie, wydaje się że cyfryzacja służby zdrowia i podmiotów medycznych będzie coraz szybsza. 
Jeżeli popatrzymy na startupy (tabelka poniżej)
Tempus – spersonalizowana medycyna (data, database – illness, curing), machine lerning, 
Flatiron Health -  healthcare technology and services company focused on accelerating cancer research and improving patient care.
VillageMD - the VillageMD model enables physicians to deliver excellent clinical results through a specialized care model that optimizes workflow and patient experience (.https://www.villagemd.com/)
Collective Health - Collective Health is the first integrated solution that allows self-funded employers to administer plans, control costs, and take care of their people—all in one place (https://collectivehealth.com/)
Rally Health - Rally® guides you through every step of your health care journey, helping you understand benefits, find the right care, and meet your individual goals.( https://www.rallyhealth.com)
Verge Genomics - “We started Verge with the vision of building a new type of therapeutics company that takes a patient data-driven approach to unlock a whole spectrum of therapies that have escaped traditional drug discovery, beginning with diseases where patients need solutions the most: neurodegenerative disease." (https://www.vergegenomics.com/)

Doximity - The professional medical network for physicians
Doximity is the largest community of healthcare professionals in the country - with over 70% of U.S. doctors and 45% of all NPs and physician assistants as verified members.- https://www.doximity.com/

Polskie startupy
DocPlanner - Twórcą pomysłu jest Mariusz Gralewski. DocPlanneroferuje lekarzom i placówkom medycznym oprogramowanie, które ułatwia zorganizowanie optymalnego przepływu pacjentów i ograniczenia odwoływanych wizyt. Pacjentom daje możliwość poznania opinii o konkretnych lekarzach oraz zarezerwowania wizyty przez interne

Infermedica - AI at the service of health
Infermedica adeptly interweaves medical and technical expertise. Our multi-disciplinary team creates AI-powered healthcare solutions that help doctors deliver efficient, safe, and reliable care to their patients https://infermedica.com.

StethoMe - StethoMe® to pierwszy system wykrywający nieprawidłowości w układzie oddechowym. StethoMe® opiera się na medycznych algorytmach AI (CE 2274) współpracujących z bezprzewodowym stetoskopem oraz dedykowaną aplikacją.
Dzięki wykorzystaniu unikalnych technologii zapewniających kontrolę jakości badania, StethoMe® może być używane przez pacjentów w warunkach domowych.
StethoMe® jest przeznaczone do zastosowań telemedycznych, umożliwiając integrację m.in. z HIS, EDM czy systemami telemedycznymi. (https://stethome.com/pl)

Cancer Center - supporting cancer diagnosis by AI (machine and deep learning) https://cancercenter.ai/


Intelliseq - software as a service platform for NGS data analysis requiring no upfront cost. IntelliseqFlow takes your WGS or WES samples from raw data to automatic and complete report with clinical insights.
https://intelliseq.com

-----------------------------------
PregnaBit - NESTMEDIC S.A. została powołana w lipcu 2014 r. opracowanie mobilnego rozwiązania telemedycznego do zdalnego badania dobrostanu płodu – badania kardiotokograficznego (KTG).
https://www.pregnabit.com/

biolumo - startup mający na celu wyprodukowanie urządzenia do wykonywania antybiogramu dla każdego pacjenta, w celu ustalenia właściwego planu antybiotykoterapii.
https://www.biolumo.eu/

Telemedi.co - platforma do przeprowadzenia telekonsultacji medycznych, już działają
https://telemedi.co/

vBionic – producent protez TOLKA, proteza kończyny górnej
https://tolka.eu/


Wpływ pandemii na rozwój technologii IT:
Pojawienie się epidemii koronowirusa spowodowało przeniesienie produkcji IT w obszar pracy domowej przy wykorzystaniu technik pracy zdalnej. O skali zjawiska może powiedzieć liczba użytkowników sieci ZOOM, powszechnie obecnie wykorzystywanej w pracy zdalnej. Pod koniec 2019 roku ZOOM mógł poszczycić się 10 milionami dziennych użytkowników, podczas gdy obecnie z jego infrastruktury korzysta przeszło 300 milionów osób. ZOOM jest jednym z kilku dostawców, których liczba użytkowników przyrosła gwałtownie w ostatnim półroczu [https://www.theverge.com/2020/4/30/21242421/zoom-300-million-users-incorrect-meeting-participants-statement].

Wpływ zmian politycznych na rozwój technologii IT - moje hipotezy, bo jeszcze nie mam źródeł do tego
- konflikt pomiędzy producentami (własność intelektualna) - konflikt jaki istnieje pomiędzy największymi producentami technologicznymi na świcie i wynikającą z tego niechęć do wykorzystywania technologii przeciwnika sprawia, że tam gdzie to możliwe producenci forsują własne rozwiązania 
- polityka ochrony środowiska, postrzeganie pracy ludzkiej (humanitaryzm, równe szanse) - wielu producentów wykorzystuje linie znajdujące się w krajach trzeciego świata, wykorzystując złą sytuację gospodarczą, kierując się jedynie interesem firmy - jest to coraz częściej piętnowane, dzięki temu firmy w sposób coraz bardziej świadomy budują infrastrukturę która służy otoczeniu i lokalnym społecznościom, coraz większa powszechna świadomość społeczna pozwala pośrednio sterować działaniami nawet wielkich producentów (możliwość niezależnego przedstawienia sytuacji w firmie, sygnaliści 
-----------------------------------

Powyższe startupy jednoznacznie wskazują kierunek rozwoju IT heathcare. Będzie on nakierowany, bardzo mocno na telemedycyny, tele diagnozę, ale jednocześnie będzie się to wiąząło z rozwojem narzędzie umożliwiających takie podejście. Dodatkowo konieczne będzie jednoczesne 
Opracowanie nowych norm, które będzie trzeba wypenić. O to jedne z nich.
ISO TC 215 consists of several Working Groups (WG), each dealing with an aspect of Electronic Health Records (EHR).
CAG 1: Executive council, harmonization and operations
WG 1: Data structure
WG 2: Messaging and communications
WG 3: Health Concept Representation
WG 4: Privacy and Security
WG 5: Health Cards >>Transitioned to a Task Force on Health Cards.
WG 6: Pharmacy and medicines business
WG 7: Devices
WG 8: Business requirements for Electronic Health Records
WG 9: SDO Harmonization
Task Forces: --e-Business for Healthcare Transactions—Multidisciplinary for Healthcare Clinicians—Harmonized Joint Work Group for Devices—Traditional Medicine (Currently restricted to Far Eastern Traditional Medicine) --Health Cards—Patient Safety and Quality

Powyższe informacje sugerują, że w zakresie HealthCare na pewno możemy spodziewać się rozwoju, związanego z diagnostyką na odległość, badań na odległość (za pomocą urządzeń przenośnych/mobilnych) czy operacji wykonywanych przez roboty. Skoro pomiary będą mogły byż na odległość to należy się również spodziewać szpitali z salami do pomiarów funkcji życiowych pacjenta – bezkontaktowych. Podejmowanie decyzji – diagnoz z wykorzystaniem maszyn uczących się, gromadzenie danych medycznych i dostępem do nich osób uprawnionych. 

Wszystkie te powyżej wymienione informacje sugerują że w najbliższej przeszłości należy się spodziewać rozwoju takich stanowisk pracy jak:
Programista:
	 Jezyki mikroporcesorowe
	Chmur obliczeniowych (AWS,Azure)
	Aplikacji opartych na analizie dużej ilości informacji (aplikacje do analizy danych genetycznych)
	Aplikacje interentowe
	security
	Baz danych zarządzenia bazą danych, dostęp do niej, aktualizacja danych.
DEvops – osoba czuwająca nad połaczeniem tego wsyztskicgo
Testerzy
	penaltyTesters
	software Testers
	medical devices testers
Analitycy danych:
	Data Scientist 
	Analitycy danych medycznych
Prawodopobnie stanowiska te będą ukierunkowane na pracę z danymi medycznymi ze względu na normy jakie muszą spełniać. W US powstają pierwsze cefrtyfikacje dla osób zajmujących się IT HealthCare takie tak:
AMIA Health Informatics Certification (AHIC) | AMIA

Job board search results (in alphabetical order, by certification)
Certification	SimplyHired 
 Indeed 
 LinkedIn Jobs 
 LinkUp 
Total
CAHIMS/CPHIMS (HIMSS)	42	48	93	35	218
CHTS (AHIMA)	21	23	44	142	230
HCISSP (ISC)²	52	59	100	28	239
RHIA (AHIMA)*	1,792	2,258	3,049	1,106	8,205
RHIT (AHIMA)	2,092	2,633	3,567	1,255	9,547



High costs of research and development along with stringent regulations and increasing user demands necessitate a sharp focus on software quality within the healthcare industry. Organizations need to create customized and modern testing strategy based on emerging testing trends. All these trends may not pertain equally to each healthcare organization but will differ based on the nature and usage of healthcare solutions as well as according to the specialized testing needs of specific healthcare providers.
What are the benefits of healthcare apps?
– Healthcare apps help the patients to book their doctor appointments easily and to get important healthcare tips
– It is the quickest way to view medical test reports, to purchase medicines online, and to find an expert specialist
– The chat facility provided by the healthcare apps is simplifying the treatment process, the doctors can chat and treat their patients in chats
– The Electronic Health Records or EHR helps to understand the patient’s history of diseases, etc.
– The feature of reminding medicines to the patient is one of the best benefits of healthcare apps. Also, this advanced feature provides a confirmation to the doctors that the patient has not ignored and started the treatment
Why testing is essential for healthcare apps?
To verify the integration with other apps:
Healthcare is one of the biggest sectors providing a number of services for the patients. A single healthcare app may not be able to fulfill every need which a patient aspires for. And, this may make the patient plan for integrating with the other apps to fulfill the needs. Hence, the app should be tested to verify whether it is compatible to integrate with other apps or not.
To monitor the user-interface:
Healthcare is not similar to regular apps. Since the app is built for their patients, the app should be regularly monitored for its user-interface. Also, medical apps receive more data and may be used on a regular basis by their patients. Hence, the app should be tested to check if it is user-centric, patient-friendly, and providing a comfortable way to interact.
To verify privacy and security:
While planning to design an app, it is essential to focus on the privacy and security of the patient’s information. It should abide and comply with all the privacy standards to protect the patient’s medical record and other healthcare provider’s information. Also, the testing measures should be practiced to secure the app with data encryption and firewalls.
To check the app usability:
Before planning to launch the app to the real world, it is crucial to test the app usability. The app has to be user-friendly and should be able to provide a clear idea of its functionality to the user. If the app fails to receive user-acceptance, then, this may decrease the scope of the app’s future. Hence, it is necessary to practice usability testing before planning for production.
To check the app compatibility:
Users can use the healthcare app through any device and any platform. And, if the app fails to provide the same performance across the devices and platforms, then this will be the biggest drawback resulting dissatisfaction among the users. Hence, performance and compatibility testing should be performed across the devices and different platforms such as windows, mac, android, etc.
To check the app performance:
The performance and functionality of the app are important factors to drive the scope of the app. The app has to function similarly across any platform and device, and also when the app is experiencing more number of users. If the app fails on performance and load issues, resulting unavailability for millions of patients may inbuilt a negative impact and drop off many of the users. Hence, load testing should be practiced to verify the app performance and functionality in all scenarios.
Emerging QA and Software Testing Trends in Healthcare Applications
High Priority to Security Testing
The cutting-edge healthcare solutions help physicians and healthcare providers to access historic health data of patients, observe their conditions, and offer treatment remotely and rapidly. Hence, it becomes important to ensure utmost security and privacy of the data that is accessed by the application. To achieve utmost security, extensive security testing has to be the key priority in the testing strategy for safeguarding the sensitive healthcare data of patients.
Big Data Management
Healthcare applications these days gather and transmit a huge amount of healthcare data from one source to another. Hence, the applications are specifically designed with explicit features to enable data collection, storage, access, and transfer. While testing next-generation healthcare applications, testers must keep in mind the complete patient data management process across various technological platforms. They must execute all obligatory tests to ensure that the patient data is managed efficiently, and without negotiating on security and privacy.
Implementation of Agile Testing Methodologies
The ever-rising need to get the applications and products faster to market necessitate the healthcare IT teams to adopt the Agile methodology. By the use of agile methodology, teams can escape the lengthy product delivery cycle and ensure quicker delivery in the end.

Emphasis on Mobile and Compatibility Testing
A huge percentage of users, including patients and healthcare professionals, these days access healthcare solutions on their mobile devices. There is an increase in the number of organizations enabling the patients to access healthcare on their smartphones, tablets, and other devices. Therefore, the healthcare solutions need to run efficiently and correctly on these devices, across various operating systems, browsers, etc. The testing strategy should include evaluating all aspects of the application by using various mobile devices, network, and operating systems.
Deployment of Skilled Testers
With several governmental mandates and user privacy issues taking over, healthcare application testing requires a lot of experience and skill. It is important to ensure the testers have correct domain knowledge and skills to evaluate the advanced healthcare applications and solutions efficiently. The testers working on healthcare projects should have skills and understanding in HL7 guidelines, and the Healthcare domain to identify critical workflows for testing effectively.

HL7 Certification
HL7 offers certification and proficiency testing to assess the knowledge and proficiency of its most frequently used health information technology (HIT) standards. Download your free path to certification guide by filling out the form on the right side

ICPMSB Certified Professional for Medical Software - Foundation Level, http://www.isqi.us/course/33/icpmsb-certified-professional-for-medical-software-foundation-level



